To apply a parallelogram, equal to a given rectilinear figure, to a given straight-line, (the applied parallelogram) overshooting by a parallelogrammic figure similar to a given (parallelogram).

Let AB be the given straight-line, and C the given rectilinear figure to which the (parallelogram) applied to AB is required (to be) equal, and D the (parallelogram) to which the excess is required (to be) similar. So it is required to apply a parallelogram, equal to the given rectilinear figure C, to the given straight-line AB, overshooting by a parallelogrammic figure similar to D.

Let AB have been cut in half at (point) E [Prop. 1.10], and let the parallelogram BF, (which is) similar, and similarly laid out, to D, have been described on EB [Prop. 6.18]. And let (parallelogram) GH have been constructed (so as to be) both similar, and similarly laid out, to D, and equal to the sum of BF and C [Prop.6.25]. And let KH correspond to FL, and KG to FE. And since (parallelogram) GH is greater than (parallelogram) FB, KH is thus also greater than FL, and KG than FE. Let FL and FE have been produced, and let FLM be (made) equal to KH, and FEN to KG [Prop. 1.3]. And let (parallelogram) MN have been completed. Thus, MN is equal and similar to GH. But, GH is similar to EL. Thus, MN is also similar to EL [Prop. 6.21]. EL is thus about the same diagonal as MN [Prop. 6.26]. Let their (common) diagonal FO have been drawn, and let the (remainder of the) figure have been described.

And since (parallelogram) GH is equal to (parallelogram) EL and (figure) C, but GH is equal to (parallelogram) MN, MN is thus also equal to EL and C. Let EL have been subtracted from both. Thus, the remaining gnomon XWV is equal to (figure) C. And since AE is equal to EB, (parallelogram) AN is also equal to (parallelogram) NB [Prop. 6.1], that is to say, (parallelogram) LP [Prop. 1.43]. Let (parallelogram) EO have been added to both. Thus, the whole (parallelogram) AO is equal to the gnomon VWX. But, the gnomon VWX is equal to (figure) C. Thus, (parallelogram) AO is also equal to (figure) C.

Thus, the parallelogram AO, equal to the given rectilinear figure C, has been applied to the given straight-line AB, overshooting by the parallelogrammic figure QP which is similar to D, since PQ is also similar to EL [Prop. 6.24]. (Which is) the very thing it was required to do.
