If two triangles have one angle equal to one angle, and the sides about other angles proportional, and the remaining angles either both less than, or both not less than, right-angles, then the triangles will be equiangular, and will have the angles about which the sides are proportional equal.

Let ABC and DEF be two triangles having one angle, BAC, equal to one angle, EDF (respectively), and the sides about (some) other angles, ABC and DEF (respectively), proportional, (so that) as AB (is) to BC, so DE (is) to EF, and the remaining (angles) at C and F, first of all, both less than right-angles. I say that triangle ABC is equiangular to triangle DEF, and (that) angle ABC will be equal to DEF, and (that) the remaining (angle) at C (will be) manifestly equal to the remaining (angle) at F.

For if angle ABC is not equal to (angle) DEF then one of them is greater. Let ABC be greater. And let (angle) ABG, equal to (angle) DEF, have been constructed on the straight-line AB at the point B on it [Prop. 1.23].

And since angle A is equal to (angle) D, and (angle) ABG to DEF, the remaining (angle) AGB is thus equal to the remaining (angle) DFE [Prop. 1.32]. Thus, triangle ABG is equiangular to triangle DEF. Thus, as AB is to BG, so DE (is) to EF [Prop. 6.4]. And as DE (is) to EF, [so] it was assumed (is) AB to BC. Thus, AB has the same ratio to each of BC and BG [Prop. 5.11]. Thus, BC (is) equal to BG [Prop. 5.9]. And, hence, the angle at C is equal to angle BGC [Prop. 1.5]. And the angle at C was assumed (to be) less than a right-angle. Thus, (angle) BGC is also less than a right-angle. Hence, the adjacent angle to it, AGB, is greater than a right-angle [Prop. 1.13]. And (AGB) was shown to be equal to the (angle) at F. Thus, the (angle) at F is also greater than a right-angle. But it was assumed (to be) less than a right-angle. The very thing is absurd. Thus, angle ABC is not unequal to (angle) DEF. Thus, (it is) equal. And the (angle) at A is also equal to the (angle) at D. And thus the remaining (angle) at C is equal to the remaining (angle) at F [Prop. 1.32]. Thus, triangle ABC is equiangular to triangle DEF.

But, again, let each of the (angles) at C and F be assumed (to be) not less than a right-angle. I say, again, that triangle ABC is equiangular to triangle DEF in this case also.

For, with the same construction, we can similarly show that BC is equal to BG. Hence, also, the angle at C is equal to (angle) BGC. And the (angle) at C (is) not less than a right-angle. Thus, BGC (is) not less than a right-angle either. So, in triangle BGC the (sum of) two angles is not less than two right-angles. The very thing is impossible [Prop. 1.17]. Thus, again, angle ABC is not unequal to DEF. Thus, (it is) equal. And the (angle) at A is also equal to the (angle) at D. Thus, the remaining (angle) at C is equal to the remaining (angle) at F [Prop. 1.32]. Thus, triangle ABC is equiangular to triangle DEF.

Thus, if two triangles have one angle equal to one angle, and the sides about other angles proportional, and the remaining angles both less than, or both not less than, right-angles, then the triangles will be equiangular, and will have the angles about which the sides (are) proportional equal. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
