The (square) on a minor (straight-line), applied to a rational (straight-line), produces a fourth apotome as breadth.

Let AB be a minor (straight-line), and CD a rational (straight-line).
And let CE, equal to the (square) on AB, have been applied to the rational (straight-line) CD, producing CF as breadth.
I say that CF is a fourth apotome.

For let BG be an attachment to AB.
Thus, AG and GB are incommensurable in square, making the sum of the squares on AG and GB rational, and twice the (rectangle contained) by AG and GB medial [Prop. 10.76].
And let CH, equal to the (square) on AG, have been applied to CD, producing CK as breadth, and KL, equal to the (square) on BG, producing KM as breadth.
Thus, the whole of CL is equal to the (sum of the squares) on AG and GB.
And the sum of the (squares) on AG and GB is rational.
CL is thus also rational.
And it is applied to the rational (straight-line) CD, producing CM as breadth.
Thus, CM (is) also rational, and commensurable in length with CD [Prop. 10.20].
And since the whole of CL is equal to the (sum of the squares) on AG and GB, of which CE is equal to the (square) on AB, the remainder FL is thus equal to twice the (rectangle contained) by AG and GB [Prop. 2.7].
Therefore, let FM have been cut in half at point N.
And let NO have been drawn through N, parallel to either of CD or ML.
Thus, FO and NL are each equal to the (rectangle contained) by AG and GB.
And since twice the (rectangle contained) by AG and GB is medial, and is equal to FL, FL is thus also medial.
And it is applied to the rational (straight-line) FE, producing FM as breadth.
Thus, FM is rational, and incommensurable in length with CD [Prop. 10.22].
And since the sum of the (squares) on AG and GB is rational, and twice the (rectangle contained) by AG and GB medial, the (sum of the squares) on AG and GB is [thus] incommensurable with twice the (rectangle contained) by AG and GB.
And CL (is) equal to the (sum of the squares) on AG and GB, and FL equal to twice the (rectangle contained) by AG and GB.
CL [is] thus incommensurable with FL.
And as CL (is) to FL, so CM is to MF [Prop. 6.1].
CM is thus incommensurable in length with MF [Prop. 10.11].
And both are rational (straight-lines).
Thus, CM and MF are rational (straight-lines which are) commensurable in square only.
CF is thus an apotome [Prop. 10.73].
[So], I say that (it is) also a fourth (apotome).

For since AG and GB are incommensurable in square, the (square) on AG (is) thus also incommensurable with the (square) on GB.
And CH is equal to the (square) on AG, and KL equal to the (square) on GB.
Thus, CH is incommensurable with KL.
And as CH (is) to KL, so CK is to KM [Prop. 6.1].
CK is thus incommensurable in length with KM [Prop. 10.11].
And since the (rectangle contained) by AG and GB is the mean proportional to the (squares) on AG and GB [Prop. 10.21 lem.], and the (square) on AG is equal to CH, and the (square) on GB to KL, and the (rectangle contained) by AG and GB to NL, NL is thus the mean proportional to CH and KL.
Thus, as CH is to NL, so NL (is) to KL.
But, as CH (is) to NL, so CK is to NM, and as NL (is) to KL, so NM is to KM [Prop. 6.1].
Thus, as CK (is) to MN, so MN is to KM [Prop. 5.11].
The (rectangle contained) by CK and KM is thus equal to the (square) on MN---that is to say, to the fourth part of the (square) on FM [Prop. 6.17].
Therefore, since CM and MF are two unequal straight-lines, and the (rectangle contained) by CK and KM, equal to the fourth part of the (square) on MF, has been applied to CM, falling short by a square figure, and divides it into incommensurable (parts), the square on CM is thus greater than (the square on) MF by the (square) on (some straight-line) incommensurable (in length) with (CM) [Prop. 10.18].
And the whole of CM is commensurable in length with the (previously) laid down rational (straight-line) CD.
Thus, CF is a fourth apotome [Def. 10.14].

Thus, the (square) on a minor, and so on ...
