If there are two unequal straight-lines, and a (rectangle) equal to the fourth part of the (square) on the lesser, falling short by a square figure, is applied to the greater, and divides it into (parts which are) incommensurable [in length], then the square on the greater will be larger than the (square on the) lesser by the (square) on (some straight-line) incommensurable (in length) with the greater.
And if the square on the greater is larger than the (square on the) lesser by the (square) on (some straight-line) incommensurable (in length) with the greater, and a (rectangle) equal to the fourth (part) of the (square) on the lesser, falling short by a square figure, is applied to the greater, then it divides it into (parts which are) incommensurable [in length].

Let A and BC be two unequal straight-lines, of which (let) BC (be) the greater.
And let a (rectangle) equal to the fourth [part] of the (square) on the lesser, A, falling short by a square figure, have been applied to BC.
And let it be the (rectangle contained) by BDC.
And let BD be incommensurable in length with DC.
I say that that the square on BC is greater than the (square on) A by the (square) on (some straight-line) incommensurable (in length) with (BC).

For, similarly, by the same construction as before, we can show that the square on BC is greater than the (square on) A by the (square) on FD.
[Therefore] it must be shown that BC is incommensurable in length with DF.
For since BD is incommensurable in length with DC, BC is thus also incommensurable in length with CD [Prop. 10.16].
But, DC is commensurable (in length) with the sum of BF and DC [Prop. 10.6].
And, thus, BC is incommensurable (in length) with the sum of BF and DC [Prop. 10.13].
Hence, BC is also incommensurable in length with the remainder FD [Prop. 10.16].
And the square on BC is greater than the (square on) A by the (square) on FD.
Thus, the square on BC is greater than the (square on) A by the (square) on (some straight-line) incommensurable (in length) with (BC).

So, again, let the square on BC be greater than the (square on) A by the (square) on (some straight-line) incommensurable (in length) with (BC).
And let a (rectangle) equal to the fourth [part] of the (square) on A, falling short by a square figure, have been applied to BC.
And let it be the (rectangle contained) by BD and DC.
It must be shown that BD is incommensurable in length with DC.

For, similarly, by the same construction, we can show that the square on BC is greater than the (square) on A by the (square) on FD.
But, the square on BC is greater than the (square) on A by the (square) on (some straight-line) incommensurable (in length) with (BC).
Thus, BC is incommensurable in length with FD.
Hence, BC is also incommensurable (in length) with the remaining sum of BF and DC [Prop. 10.16].
But, the sum of BF and DC is commensurable in length with DC [Prop. 10.6].
Thus, BC is also incommensurable in length with DC [Prop. 10.13].
Hence, via separation, BD is also incommensurable in length with DC [Prop. 10.16].

Thus, if there are two ... straight-lines, and so on ....
