The rectangle contained by medial straight-lines (which are) commensurable in square only is either rational or medial.

For let the rectangle AC be contained by the medial straight-lines AB and BC (which are) commensurable in square only.
I say that AC is either rational or medial.

For let the squares AD and BE have been described on (the straight-lines) AB and BC (respectively).
AD and BE are thus each medial.
And let the rational (straight-line) FG be laid out.
And let the rectangular parallelogram GH, equal to AD, have been applied to FG, producing FH as breadth.
And let the rectangular parallelogram MK, equal to AC, have been applied to HM, producing HK as breadth.
And, finally, let NL, equal to BE, have similarly been applied to KN, producing KL as breadth.
Thus, FH, HK, and KL are in a straight-line.
Therefore, since AD and BE are each medial, and AD is equal to GH, and BE to NL, GH and NL (are) thus each also medial.
And they are applied to the rational (straight-line) FG.
FH and KL are thus each rational, and incommensurable in length with FG [Prop. 10.22].
And since AD is commensurable with BE, GH is thus also commensurable with NL.
And as GH is to NL, so FH (is) to KL [Prop. 6.1].
Thus, FH is commensurable in length with KL [Prop. 10.11].
Thus, FH and KL are rational (straight-lines which are) commensurable in length.
Thus, the (rectangle contained) by FH and KL is rational [Prop. 10.19].
And since DB is equal to BA, and OB to BC, thus as DB is to BC, so AB (is) to BO.
But, as DB (is) to BC, so DA (is) to AC [Props. 6.1].
And as AB (is) to BO, so AC (is) to CO [Prop. 6.1].
Thus, as DA is to AC, so AC (is) to CO.
And AD is equal to GH, and AC to MK, and CO  to NL.
Thus, as GH is to MK, so MK (is) to NL.
Thus, also, as FH is to HK, so HK (is) to KL [Props. 6.1, 5.11].
Thus, the (rectangle contained) by FH and KL is equal to the (square) on HK [Prop. 6.17].
And the (rectangle contained) by FH and KL (is) rational.
Thus, the (square) on HK is also rational.
Thus, HK is rational.
And if it is commensurable in length with FG then HN is rational [Prop. 10.19].
And if it is incommensurable in length with FG then KH and HM are rational (straight-lines which are) commensurable in square only: thus, HN is medial [Prop. 10.21].
Thus, HN is either rational or medial.
And HN (is) equal to AC.
Thus, AC is either rational or medial.

Thus, the ... by medial straight-lines (which are) commensurable in square only, and so on ....
