When two medial (areas which are) incommensurable with one another are added together, the remaining two irrational (straight-lines) arise (as the square-roots of the total area)---either a second bimedial, or the square-root of (the sum of) two medial (areas).

For let the two medial (areas) AB and CD, (which are) incommensurable with one another, have been added together.
I say that the square-root of area AD is either a second bimedial, or the square-root of (the sum of) two medial (areas).

For AB is either greater than or less than CD.
By chance, let AB, first of all, be greater than CD.
And let the rational (straight-line) EF be laid down.
And let EG, equal to AB, have been applied to EF, producing EH as breadth, and HI, equal to CD, producing HK as breadth.
And since AB and CD are each medial, EG and HI (are) thus also each medial.
And they are applied to the rational straight-line FE, producing EH and HK (respectively) as breadth.
Thus, EH and HK are each rational (straight-lines which are) incommensurable in length with EF [Prop. 10.22].
And since AB is incommensurable with CD, and AB is equal to EG, and CD to HI, EG is thus also incommensurable with HI.
And as EG (is) to HI, so EH is to HK [Prop. 6.1].
EHis thus incommensurable in length with HK [Prop. 10.11].
Thus, EH and HK are rational (straight-lines which are) commensurable in square only.
EK is thus a binomial (straight-line) [Prop. 10.36].
And the square on EH is greater than (the square on) HK either by the (square) on (some straight-line) commensurable (in length) with (EH), or by the (square) on (some straight-line) incommensurable (in length with EH).
Let it, first of all, be greater by the square on (some straight-line) commensurable in length with (EH).
And neither of EH or HK is commensurable in length with the (previously) laid down rational (straight-line) EF.
Thus, EK is a third binomial (straight-line) [Def. 10.7].
And EF (is) rational.
And if an area is contained by a rational (straight-line) and a third binomial (straight-line) then the square-root of the area is a second bimedial (straight-line) [Prop. 10.56].
Thus, the square-root of EI---that is to say, of AD---is a second bimedial.
And so, let the square on EH be greater than (the square) on HK by the (square) on (some straight-line) incommensurable in length with (EH).
And EH and HK are each incommensurable in length with EF.
Thus, EK is a sixth binomial (straight-line) [Def. 10.10].
And if an area is contained by a rational (straight-line) and a sixth binomial (straight-line) then the square-root of the area is the square-root of (the sum of) two medial (areas) [Prop. 10.59].
Hence, the square-root of area AD is also the square-root of (the sum of) two medial (areas).

[So, similarly, we can show that, even if AB is less than CD, the square-root of area AD is either a second bimedial or the square-root of (the sum of) two medial (areas).]

Thus, when two medial (areas which are) incommensurable with one another are added together, the remaining two irrational (straight-lines) arise (as the square-roots of the total area)---either a second bimedial, or the square-root of (the sum of) two medial (areas).

A binomial (straight-line), and the (other) irrational (straight-lines) after it, are neither the same as a medial (straight-line) nor (the same) as one another.
For the (square) on a medial (straight-line), applied to a rational (straight-line), produces as breadth a rational (straight-line which is) also incommensurable in length with (the straight-line) to which it is applied [Prop. 10.22].
And the (square) on a binomial (straight-line), applied to a rational (straight-line), produces as breadth a first binomial [Prop. 10.60].
And the (square) on a first bimedial (straight-line), applied to a rational (straight-line), produces as breadth a second binomial [Prop. 10.61].
And the (square) on a second bimedial (straight-line), applied to a rational (straight-line), produces as breadth a third binomial [Prop. 10.62].
And the (square) on a major (straight-line), applied to a rational (straight-line), produces as breadth a fourth binomial [Prop. 10.63].
And the (square) on the square-root of a rational plus a medial (area), applied to a rational (straight-line), produces as breadth a fifth binomial [Prop. 10.64].
And the (square) on the square-root of (the sum of) two medial (areas), applied to a rational (straight-line), produces as breadth a sixth binomial [Prop. 10.65].
And the aforementioned breadths differ from the first (breadth), and from one another---from the first, because it is rational---and from one another, because they are not the same in order.
Hence, the (previously mentioned) irrational (straight-lines) themselves also differ from one another.
