If a first (magnitude) and a third are equal multiples of a second and a fourth (respectively), and a fifth (magnitude) and a sixth (are) also equal multiples of the second and fourth (respectively), then the first (magnitude) and the fifth, being added together, and the third and the sixth, (being added together), will also be equal multiples of the second (magnitude) and the fourth (respectively).

For let a first (magnitude) AB and a third DE be equal multiples of a second C and a fourth F (respectively).
And let a fifth (magnitude) BG and a sixth EH also be (other) equal multiples of the second C and the fourth F (respectively).
I say that the first (magnitude) and the fifth, being added together, (to give) AG, and the third (magnitude) and the sixth, (being added together, to give) DH, will also be equal multiples of the second (magnitude) C and the fourth F (respectively).

For since AB and DE are equal multiples of C and F (respectively), thus as many (magnitudes) as (there) are in AB equal to C, so many (are there) also in DE equal to F.
And so, for the same (reasons), as many (magnitudes) as (there) are in BG equal to C, so many (are there) also in EH equal to F.
Thus, as many (magnitudes) as (there) are in the whole of AG equal to C, so many (are there) also in the whole of DH equal to F.
Thus, as many times as AG is (divisible) by C, so many times will DH also be divisible by F.
Thus, the first (magnitude) and the fifth, being added together, (to give) AG, and the third (magnitude) and the sixth, (being added together, to give) DH, will also be equal multiples of the second (magnitude) C and the fourth F (respectively).

Thus, if a first (magnitude) and a third are equal multiples of a second and a fourth (respectively), and a fifth (magnitude) and a sixth (are) also equal multiples of the second and fourth (respectively), then the first (magnitude) and the fifth, being added together, and the third and sixth, (being added together), will also be equal multiples of the second (magnitude) and the fourth (respectively).
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
