The square on the square-root of a rational plus a medial (area) applied to a rational (straight-line) produces as breadth a fifth binomial (straight-line).

Let AB be the square-root of a rational plus a medial (area) having been divided into its (component) straight-lines at C, such that AC is greater.
And let the rational (straight-line) DE be laid down.
And let the (parallelogram) DF, equal to the (square) on AB, have been applied to DE, producing DG as breadth.
I say that DG is a fifth binomial straight-line.

Let the same construction be made as in the (propositions) before this.
Therefore, since AB is the square-root of a rational plus a medial (area), having been divided at C, AC and CB are thus incommensurable in square, making the sum of the squares on them medial, and the (rectangle contained) by them rational [Prop. 10.40].
Therefore, since the sum of the (squares) on AC and CB is medial, DL is thus medial.
Hence, DM is rational and incommensurable in length with DE [Prop. 10.22].
Again, since twice the (rectangle contained) by ACB---that is to say, MF---is rational, MG (is) thus rational and commensurable (in length) with DE [Prop. 10.20].
DM (is) thus incommensurable (in length) with MG [Prop. 10.13].
Thus, DM and MG are rational (straight-lines which are) commensurable in square only.
Thus, DG is a binomial (straight-line) [Prop. 10.36].
So, I say that (it is) also a fifth (binomial straight-line).

For, similarly (to the previous propositions), it can be shown that the (rectangle contained) by DKM is equal to the (square) on MN, and DK (is) incommensurable in length with KM.
Thus, the square on DM is greater than (the square on) MG by the (square) on (some straight-line) incommensurable (in length) with (DM) [Prop. 10.18].
And DM and MG are [rational] (straight-lines which are) commensurable in square only, and the lesser MG is commensurable in length with DE.

Thus, DG is a fifth binomial (straight-line) [Def. 10.9].
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
