To construct a cube, and to enclose (it) in a sphere, like in the (case of the) pyramid, and to show that the square on the diameter of the sphere is three times the (square) on the side of the cube.

Let the diameter AB of the given sphere be laid out, and let it have been cut at C such that AC is double CB.
And let the semi-circle ADB have been drawn on AB.
And let CD have been drawn from C at right-angles to AB.
And let DB have been joined.
And let the square EFGH, having (its) side equal to DB, be laid out.
And let EK, FL, GM, and HN have been drawn from (points) E, F, G, and H, (respectively), at right-angles to the plane of square EFGH.
And let EK, FL, GM, and HN, equal to one of EF, FG, GH, and HE, have been cut off from EK, FL, GM, and HN, respectively.
And let KL, LM, MN, and NK have been joined.
Thus, a cube contained by six equal squares has been constructed.

So, it is also necessary to enclose it by the given sphere, and to show that the square on the diameter of the sphere is three times the (square) on the side of the cube.

For let KG and EG have been joined.
And since angle KEG is a right-angle—on account of KE also being at right-angles to the plane EG, and manifestly also to the straight-line EG [Def. 11.3]—the semi-circle drawn on KG will thus also pass through point E.
Again, since GF is at right-angles to each of FL and FE, GF is thus also at right-angles to the plane F K [Prop. 11.4].
Hence, if we also join FK then GF will also be at right-angles to FK.
And, again, on account of this, the semi-circle drawn on GK will also pass through point F.
Similarly, it will also pass through the remaining (angular) points of the cube.
So, if KG remains (fixed), and the semi-circle is carried around, and again established at the same (position) from which it began to be moved, then the cube will have been enclosed by a sphere.
So, I say that (it is) also (enclosed) by the given (sphere).
For since GF is equal to FE, and the angle at F is a right-angle, the (square) on EG is thus double the (square) on EF [Prop. 1.47].
And EF (is) equal to EK.
Thus, the (square) on EG is double the (square) on EK.
Hence, the (sum of the squares) on GE and EK—that is to say, the (square) on GK [Prop. 1.47]—is three times the (square) on EK.
And since AB is three times BC, and as AB (is) to BC, so the (square) on AB (is) to the (square) on BD [Prop. 6.8, Def. 5.9], the (square) on AB (is) thus three times the (square) on BD.
And the (square) on GK was also shown (to be) three times the (square) on KE.
And KE was made equal to DB.
Thus, KG (is) also equal to AB.
And AB is the radius of the given sphere.
Thus, KG is also equal to the diameter of the given sphere.

Thus, the cube has been enclosed by the given sphere.
And it has simultaneously been shown that the square on the diameter of the sphere is three times the (square) on the side of the cube.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
