In a circle, the angle in a semi-circle is a right-angle, and that in a greater segment (is) less than a right-angle, and that in a lesser segment (is) greater than a right-angle.
And, further, the angle of a segment greater (than a semi-circle) is greater than a right-angle, and the angle of a segment less (than a semi-circle) is less than a right-angle.

Let ABCD be a circle, and let BC be its diameter, and E its center.
And let BA, AC, AD, and DC have been joined.
I say that the angle BAC in the semi-circle BAC is a right-angle, and the angle ABC in the segment ABC, (which is) greater than a semi-circle, is less than a right-angle, and the angle ADC in the segment ADC, (which is) less than a semi-circle, is greater than a right-angle.

Let AE have been joined, and let BA have been drawn through to F.

And since BE is equal to EA, angle ABE is also equal to BAE [Prop. 1.5].
Again, since CE is equal to EA, ACE is also equal to CAE [Prop. 1.5].
Thus, the whole (angle) BAC is equal to the two (angles) ABC and ACB.
And FAC, (which is) external to triangle ABC, is also equal to the two angles ABC and ACB [Prop. 1.32].
Thus, angle BAC (is) also equal to FAC.
Thus, (they are) each right-angles [Def. 1.10].
Thus, the angle BAC in the semi-circle BAC is a right-angle.

And since the two angles ABC and BAC of triangle ABC are less than two right-angles [Prop. 1.17], and BAC is a right-angle, angle ABC is thus less than a right-angle.
And it is in segment ABC, (which is) greater than a semi-circle.

And since ABCD is a quadrilateral within a circle, and for quadrilaterals within circles the (sum of the) opposite angles is equal to two right-angles [Prop. 3.22] [angles ABC and ADC are thus equal to two right-angles], and (angle) ABC is less than a right-angle.
The remaining angle ADC is thus greater than a right-angle.
And it is in segment ADC, (which is) less than a semi-circle.

I also say that the angle of the greater segment, (namely) that contained by the circumference ABC and the straight-line AC, is greater than a right-angle.
And the angle of the lesser segment, (namely) that contained by the circumference AD[C] and the straight-line AC, is less than a right-angle.
And this is immediately apparent.
For since the (angle contained by) the two straight-lines BA and AC is a right-angle, the (angle) contained by the circumference ABC and the straight-line AC is thus greater than a right-angle.
Again, since the (angle contained by) the straight-lines AC and AF is a right-angle, the (angle) contained by the circumference AD[C] and the straight-line CA is thus less than a right-angle.

Thus, in a circle, the angle in a semi-circle is a right-angle, and that in a greater segment (is) less than a right-angle, and that in a lesser [segment] (is) greater than a right-angle.
And, further, the [angle] of a segment greater (than a semi-circle) [is] greater than a right-angle, and the [angle] of a segment less (than a semi-circle) is less than a right-angle.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
