If a straight-line is cut into equal and unequal (pieces) then the rectangle contained by the unequal pieces of the whole (straight-line), plus the square on the (difference) between the (equal and unequal) pieces, is equal to the square on half (of the straight-line).

For let any straight-line AB have been cut—equally at C, and unequally at D.
I say that the rectangle contained by AD and DB, plus the square on CD, is equal to the square on CB.

For let the square CEF B have been described on CB [Prop. 1.46], and let BE have been joined, and let DG have been drawn through D, parallel to either of CE or BF [Prop. 1.31], and again let KM have been drawn through H, parallel to either of AB or EF [Prop. 1.31], and again let AK have been drawn through A, parallel to either of CL or BM [Prop. 1.31].
And since the complement CH is equal to the complement HF [Prop. 1.43], let the (square) DM have been added to both.
Thus, the whole (rectangle) CM is equal to the whole (rectangle) DF.
But, (rectangle) CM is equal to (rectangle) AL, since AC is also equal to CB [Prop. 1.36].
Thus, (rectangle) AL is also equal to (rectangle) DF.
Let (rectangle) CH have been added to both.
Thus, the whole (rectangle) AH is equal to the gnomon NOP.
But, AH is the (rectangle contained) by AD and DB.
For DH (is) equal to DB.
Thus, the gnomon NOP is also equal to the (rectangle contained) by AD and DB.
Let LG, which is equal to the (square) on CD, have been added to both.
Thus, the gnomon NOP and the (square) LG are equal to the rectangle contained by AD and DB, and the square on CD.
But, the gnomon NOP and the (square) LG is (equivalent to) the whole square CEFB, which is on CB.
Thus, the rectangle contained by AD and DB, plus the square on CD, is equal to the square on CB.

Thus, if a straight-line is cut into equal and unequal (pieces) then the rectangle contained by the unequal pieces of the whole (straight-line), plus the square on the (difference) between the (equal and unequal) pieces, is equal to the square on half (of the straight-line).
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
