1. A magnitude is a part of a(nother) magnitude, the lesser of the greater, when it measures the greater.

2. And the greater (magnitude is) a multiple of the lesser when it is measured by the lesser.

3. A ratio is a certain type of condition with respect to size of two magnitudes of the same kind.

4. (Those)magnitudes are said to have a ratio with respect to one another which, being multiplied, are capable of exceeding one another.

5. Magnitudes are said to be in the same ratio, the first to the second, and the third to the fourth, when equal multiples of the first and the third either both exceed, are both equal to, or are both less than, equal multiples of the second and the fourth, respectively, being taken in corresponding order, according to any kind of multiplication whatever.

6. And let magnitudes having the same ratio be called proportional.

7. And when for equal multiples (as in Def. 5), the multiple of the first (magnitude) exceeds the multiple of the second, and the multiple of the third (magnitude) does not exceed the multiple of the fourth, then the first (magnitude) is said to have a greater ratio to the second than the third (magnitude has) to the fourth.

8. And a proportion in three terms is the smallest (possible).

9. And when three magnitudes are proportional, the first is said to have to the third the squared" ratio of that (it has) to the

10. And when four magnitudes are (continuously) proportional, the first is said to have to the fourth the cubed ratio of that (it has) to the second. And so on, similarly, in successive order, whatever the (continuous) proportion might be.

11. These magnitudes are said to be corresponding (magnitudes): the leading to the leading (of two ratios), and the following to the following.

12. An alternate ratio is a taking of the (ratio of the) leading (magnitude) to the leading (of two equal ratios), and (setting it equal to) the (ratio of the) following (magnitude) to the following.

13. An inverse ratio is a taking of the (ratio of the) following (magnitude) as the leading and the leading (magnitude) as the following.

14. A composition of a ratio is a taking of the (ratio of the) leading plus the following (magnitudes), as one, to the following (magnitude) by itself.

15. A separation of a ratio is a taking of the (ratio of the) excess by which the leading (magnitude) exceeds the following to the following (magnitude) by itself.

16. A conversion of a ratio is a taking of the (ratio of the) leading (magnitude) to the excess by which the leading (magnitude) exceeds the following.

17. There being several magnitudes, and other (magnitudes) of equal number to them, (which are) also in the same ratio taken two by two, a ratio via equality (or ex aequali) occurs when as the first is to the last in the first (set of) magnitudes, so the first (is) to the last in the second (set of) magnitudes. Or alternately, (it is) a taking of the (ratio of the) outer (magnitudes) by the removal of the inner (magnitudes).

18. There being three magnitudes, and other (magnitudes) of equal number to them, a perturbed proportion occurs when as the leading is to the following in the first (set of) magnitudes, so the leading (is) to the following in the second (set of) magnitudes, and as the following (is) to some other (i.e., the remaining magnitude) in the first (set of) magnitudes, so some other (is) to the leading in the second (set of) magnitudes.
