To inscribe an equilateral and equiangular hexagon in a given circle.

Let ABCDEF be the given circle.
So it is required to inscribe an equilateral and equiangular hexagon in circle ABCDEF.

Let the diameter AD of circle ABCDEF have been drawn,† and let the center G of the circle have been found [Prop. 3.1].
And let the circle EGCH have been drawn, with center D, and radius DG.
And EG and CG being joined, let them have been drawn across (the circle) to points B and F (respectively).
And let AB, BC, CD, DE, EF, and FA have been joined.
I say that the hexagon ABCDEF is equilateral and equiangular.

For since point G is the center of circle ABCDEF, GE is equal to GD.
Again, since point D is the center of circle GCH, DE is equal to DG.
But, GE was shown (to be) equal to GD.
Thus, GE is also equal to ED.
Thus, triangle EGD is equilateral.
Thus, its three angles EGD, GDE, and DEG are also equal to one another, inasmuch as the angles at the base of isosceles triangles are equal to one another [Prop. 1.5].
And the three angles of the triangle are equal to two right-angles [Prop. 1.32].
Thus, angle EGD is one third of two right-angles.
So, similarly, DGC can also be shown (to be) one third of two right-angles.
And since the straight-line CG, standing on EB, makes adjacent angles EGC and CGB equal to two right-angles [Prop. 1.13], the remaining angle CGB is thus also one third of two right-angles.
Thus, angles EGD, DGC, and CGB are equal to one another.
And hence the (angles) opposite to them BGA, AGF , and F GE are also equal [to EGD, DGC, and CGB (respectively)] [Prop. 1.15].
Thus, the six angles EGD, DGC, CGB, BGA, AGF, and FGE are equal to one another.
And equal angles stand on equal circumferences [Prop. 3.26].
Thus, the six circumferences AB, BC, CD, DE, EF, and FA are equal to one another.
And equal circumferences are subtended by equal straight-lines [Prop. 3.29].
Thus, the six straight-lines (AB, BC, CD, DE, EF, and FA) are equal to one another.
Thus, hexagon ABCDEF is equilateral.
So, I say that (it is) also equiangular.
For since circumference F A is equal to circumference ED, let circumference ABCD have been added to both.
Thus, the whole of FABCD is equal to the whole of EDCBA.
And angle FED stands on circumference FABCD, and angle AF E on circumference EDCBA.
Thus, angle AFE is equal to DEF [Prop. 3.27].
Similarly, it can also be shown that the remaining angles of hexagon ABCDEF are individually equal to each of the angles AFE and FED.
Thus, hexagon ABCDEF is equiangular.
And it was also shown (to be) equilateral.
And it has been inscribed in circle ABCDE.

Thus, an equilateral and equiangular hexagon has been inscribed in the given circle.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to do.

Corollary

So, from this, (it is) manifest that a side of the hexagon is equal to the radius of the circle.
And similarly to a pentagon, if we draw tangents to the circle through the (sixfold) divisions of the (circumference of the) circle, an equilateral and equiangular hexagon can be circumscribed about the circle, analogously to the aforementioned pentagon.
And, further, by (means) similar to the aforementioned pentagon, we can inscribe and circumscribe a circle in (and about) a given hexagon.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to do.
