To circumscribe a circle about a given triangle.

Let ABC be the given triangle.
So it is required to circumscribe a circle about the given triangle ABC.

Let the straight-lines AB and AC have been cut in half at points D and E (respectively) [Prop. 1.10].
And let DF and EF have been drawn from points D and E, at right-angles to AB and AC (respectively) [Prop. 1.11].
So (DF and EF ) will surely either meet inside triangle ABC, on the straight-line BC, or beyond BC.

Let them, first of all, meet inside (triangle ABC) at (point) F, and let FB, FC, and FA have been joined.
And since AD is equal to DB, and DF is common and at right-angles, the base AF is thus equal to the base FB [Prop. 1.4].
So, similarly, we can show that CF is also equal to AF.
So that FB is also equal to FC.
Thus, the three (straight-lines) FA, FB, and FC are equal to one another.
Thus, the circle drawn with center F, and radius one of A, B, or C, will also go through the remaining points.
And the circle will have been circumscribed about triangle ABC.
Let it have been (so) circumscribed, like ABC (in the first diagram from the left).

And so, let DF and EF meet on the straight-line BC at (point) F, like in the second diagram (from the left).
And let AF have been joined.
So, similarly, we can show that point F is the center of the circle circumscribed about triangle ABC.

And so, let DF and EF meet outside triangle ABC, again at (point) F, like in the third diagram (from the left).
And let AF, BF, and CF have been joined.
And, again, since AD is equal to DB, and DF is common and at right-angles, the base AF is thus equal to the base BF [Prop. 1.4].
So, similarly, we can show that CF is also equal to AF.
So that BF is also equal to FC.
Thus, [again] the circle drawn with center F, and radius one of FA, FB, and FC, will also go through the remaining points.
And it will have been circumscribed about triangle ABC.

Thus, a circle has been circumscribed about the given triangle.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to do.
