1. A solid is a (figure) having length and breadth and depth.

2. The extremity of a solid (is) a surface.

3. A straight-line is at right-angles to a plane when it makes right-angles with all of the straight-lines joined to it which are also in the plane.

4. A plane is at right-angles to a(nother) plane when (all of) the straight-lines drawn in one of the planes, at right-angles to the common section of the planes, are at right-angles to the remaining plane.

5. The inclination of a straight-line to a plane is the angle contained by the drawn and standing (straight-lines), when a perpendicular is lead to the plane from the end of the (standing) straight-line raised (out of the plane), and a straight-line is (then) joined from the point (so) generated to the end of the (standing) straight-line (lying) in the plane.

6. The inclination of a plane to a(nother) plane is the acute angle contained by the (straight-lines), (one) in each of the planes, drawn at right-angles to the common segment (of the planes), at the same point.

7. A plane is said to have been similarly inclined to a plane, as another to another, when the aforementioned angles of inclination are equal to one another.

8. Parallel planes are those which do not meet (one another).

9. Similar solid figures are those contained by equal numbers of similar planes (which are similarly arranged).

10. But equal and similar solid figures are those contained by similar planes equal in number and in magnitude (which are similarly arranged).

11. A solid angle is the inclination (constituted) by more than two lines joining one another (at the same point), and not being in the same surface, to all of the lines.
Otherwise, a solid angle is that contained by more than two plane angles, not being in the same plane, and constructed at one point.

12. A pyramid is a solid figure, contained by planes, (which is) constructed from one plane to one point.

13. A prism is a solid figure, contained by planes, of which the two opposite (planes) are equal, similar, and parallel, and the remaining (planes are) parallelograms.

14. A sphere is the figure enclosed when, the diameter of a semicircle remaining (fixed), the semicircle is carried around, and again established at the same (position) from which it began to be moved.

15. And the axis of the sphere is the fixed straight-line about which the semicircle is turned.

16. And the center of the sphere is the same as that of the semicircle.

17. And the diameter of the sphere is any straight-line which is drawn through the center and terminated in both directions by the surface of the sphere.

18. A cone is the figure enclosed when, one of the sides of a right-angled triangle about the right-angle remaining (fixed), the triangle is carried around, and again established at the same (position) from which it began to be moved.
And if the fixed straight-line is equal to the remaining (straight-line) about the right-angle, (which is) carried around, then the cone will be right-angled, and if less, obtuse-angled, and if greater, acute-angled.

19. And the axis of the cone is the fixed straight-line about which the triangle is turned.

20. And the base (of the cone is) the circle described by the (remaining) straight-line (about the right-angle which is) carried around (the axis).

21. A cylinder is the figure enclosed when, one of the sides of a right-angled parallelogram about the right-angle remaining (fixed), the parallelogram is carried around, and again established at the same (position) from which it began to be moved.

22. And the axis of the cylinder is the stationary straight-line about which the parallelogram is turned.

23. And the bases (of the cylinder are) the circles described by the two opposite sides (which are) carried around.

24. Similar cones and cylinders are those for which the axes and the diameters of the bases are proportional. 25. A cube is a solid figure contained by six equal squares.

26. An octahedron is a solid figure contained by eight equal and equilateral triangles.

27. An icosahedron is a solid figure contained by twenty equal and equilateral triangles.

28. A dodecahedron is a solid figure contained by twelve equal, equilateral, and equiangular pentagons.
