To find the least of those (numbers) having the same ratio as any given multitude of numbers.

Let A, B, and C be any given multitude of numbers.
So it is required to find the least of those (numbers) having the same ratio as A, B, and C.

For A, B, and C are either prime to one another, or not.
In fact, if A, B, and C are prime to one another then they are the least of those (numbers) having the same ratio as them [Prop. 7.22].

And if not, let the greatest common measure, D, of A, B, and C have be taken [Prop. 7.3].
And as many times as D measures A, B, C, so many units let there be in E, F, G, respectively.
And thus E, F, G measure A, B, C, respectively, according to the units in D [Prop. 7.15].
Thus, E, F, G measure A, B, C (respectively) an equal number of times.
Thus, E, F, G are in the same ratio as A, B, C (respectively) [Def. 7.20].
So I say that (they are) also the least (of those numbers having the same ratio as A, B, C).
For if E, F, G are not the least of those (numbers) having the same ratio as A, B, C (respectively), then there will be [some] numbers lessthan E, F, G which are in the same ratio as A, B, C (respectively).
Let them be H, K, L.
Thus, H measures A the same number of times that K, L also measure B, C, respectively.
And as many times as H measures A, so many units let there be in M.
Thus, K, L measure B, C, respectively, according to the units in M.
And since H measures A according to the units in M, M thus also measures A according to the units in H [Prop. 7.15].
So, for the same (reasons), M also measures B, C according to the units in K, L, respectively.
Thus, M measures A, B, and C.
And since H measures A according to the units in M, H has thus made A (by) multiplying M.
So, for the same (reasons), E has also made A (by) multiplying D.
Thus, the (number created) from (multiplying) E and D is equal to the (number created) from (multiplying) H and M.
Thus, as E (is) to H, so M (is) to D [Prop. 7.19].
And E (is) greater than H.
Thus, M (is) also greater than D [Prop. 5.13].
And (M ) measures A, B, and C.
The very thing is impossible.
For D was assumed (to be) the greatest common measure of A, B, and C.
Thus, there cannot be any numbers less than E, F, G which are in the same ratio as A, B, C (respectively).
Thus, E, F, G are the least of (those numbers) having the same ratio as A, B, C (respectively).
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
