To find the least number which three given numbers (all) measure.

Let A, B, and C be the three given numbers.
So it is required to find the least number which they (all) measure.

For let the least (number), D, measured by the two (numbers) A and B have been taken [Prop. 7.34].
So C either measures, or does not measure, D.
Let it, first of all, measure (D).
And A and B also measure D.
Thus, A, B, and C (all) measure D.
So I say that (D is) also the least (number measured by A, B, and C).
For if not, A, B, and C will (all) measure [some] number which is less than D.
Let them measure E (which is less than D).
Since A, B, and C (all) measure E then A and B thus also measure E.
Thus, the least (number) measured by A and B will also measure [E] [Prop.
7.35].
And D is the least (number) measured by A and B.
Thus, D will measure E, the greater (measuring) the lesser.
The very thing is impossible.
Thus, A, B, and C cannot (all) measure some number which is less than D.
Thus, A, B, and C (all) measure the least (number) D.

So, again, let C not measure D.
And let the least number, E, measured by C and D have been taken [Prop. 7.34].
Since A and B measure D, and D measures E, A and B thus also measure E.
And C also measures [E].
Thus, A, B, and C [also] measure E.
So I say that (E is) also the least (number measured by A, B, and C).
For if not, A, B, and C will (all) measure some (number) which is less than E.
Let them measure F (which is less than E).
Since A, B, and C (all) measure F, A and B thus also measure F.
Thus, the least (number) measured by A and B will also measure F [Prop. 7.35].
And D is the least (number) measured by A and B.
Thus, D measures F.
And C also measures F.
Thus, D and C (both) measure F.
Hence, the least (number) measured by D and C will also measure F [Prop. 7.35].
And E is the least (number) measured by C and D.
Thus, E measures F, the greater (measuring) the lesser.
The very thing is impossible.
Thus, A, B, and C cannot measure some number which is less than E.
Thus, E (is) the least (number) which is measured by A, B, and C.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
