Only one straight-line, which is incommensurable in square with the whole, and (together) with the whole makes the sum of the squares on them medial, and twice the (rectangle contained) by them medial, and, moreover, incommensurable with the sum of the (squares) on them, can be attached to that (straight-line) which with a medial (area) makes a medial whole.

Let AB be a (straight-line) which with a medial (area) makes a medial whole, BC being (so) attached to it.
Thus, AC and CB are incommensurable in square, fulfilling the (other) aforementioned (conditions) [Prop. 10.78].
I say that a(nother) (straight-line) fulfilling the aforementioned (conditions) cannot be attached to AB.

For, if possible, let BD be (so) attached.
Hence, AD and DB are also (straight-lines which are) incommensurable in square, making the squares on AD and DB (added) together medial, and twice the (rectangle contained) by AD and DB medial, and, moreover, the (sum of the squares) on AD and DB incommensurable with twice the (rectangle contained) by AD and DB [Prop. 10.78].
And let the rational (straight-line) EF be laid down.
And let EG, equal to the (sum of the squares) on AC and CB, have been applied to EF, producing EM as breadth.
And let HG, equal to twice the (rectangle contained) by AC and CB, have been applied to EF, producing HM as breadth.
Thus, the remaining (square) on AB is equal to EL [Prop. 2.7].
Thus, AB is the square-root of EL.
Again, let EI, equal to the (sum of the squares) on AD and DB, have been applied to EF, producing EN as breadth.
And the (square) on AB is also equal to EL.
Thus, the remaining twice the (rectangle contained) by AD and DB [is] equal to HI [Prop. 2.7].
And since the sum of the (squares) on AC and CB is medial, and is equal to EG, EG is thus also medial.
And it is applied to the rational (straight-line) EF, producing EM as breadth.
EM is thus rational, and incommensurable in length with EF [Prop. 10.22].
Again, since twice the (rectangle contained) by AC and CB is medial, and is equal to HG, HG is thus also medial.
And it is applied to the rational (straight-line) EF, producing HM as breadth.
HM is thus rational, and incommensurable in length with EF [Prop. 10.22].
And since the (sum of the squares) on AC and CB is incommensurable with twice the (rectangle contained) by AC and CB, EG is also incommensurable with HG.
Thus, EM is also incommensurable in length with MH [Props. 6.1, 10.11].
And they are both rational (straight-lines).
Thus, EM and MH are rational (straight-lines which are) commensurable in square only.
Thus, EH is an apotome [Prop. 10.73], with HM attached to it.
So, similarly, we can show that EH is again an apotome, with HN attached to it.
Thus, different rational (straight-lines), which are commensurable in square only with the whole, are attached to an apotome.
The very thing was shown (to be) impossible [Prop. 10.79].
Thus, another straight-line cannot be (so) attached to AB.

Thus, only one straight-line, which is incommensurable in square with the whole, and (together) with the whole makes the squares on them (added) together medial, and twice the (rectangle contained) by them medial, and, moreover, the (sum of the) squares on them incommensurable with the (rectangle contained) by them, can be attached to AB.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
